---
author: Lise Henry
title: Announcing Crowbook 0.11.0!

output.html: 0.11.0.html
output.pdf: 0.11.0.pdf
---

Annoucing Crowbook 0.11.0!
================================

I'm pleased to announce the
[0.11.0](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook/releases/tag/v0.11.0) 
release of [Crowbook](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook), a
converter from Markdown books to PDF, EPUB and HTML. 

Since I never made a proper blog post to talk about Crowbook (in english at
least) (the first release was announced on the
[Rust reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/46xla6/crowbook_yet_another_converter_from_markdown_to/) but
didn't go into much detail), and it's a good time in the year to pause
a little and look at what has been done in the last 12 months, I
thought it would be a good occasion to do so.

What is crowbook?
---------------------

So, what is Crowbook? It's yet another tool that takes Markdown files
and convert them to HTML, PDF and EPUB. The format is quite simple,
e.g. looking not further
than
[this very document](https://github.com/lise-henry/lise-henry.github.io/blob/master/articles/0.11.0.md),
the code looks like this: 

```
---
author: Lise Henry
title: Announcing Crowbook 0.11.0!

output.html: 0.11.0.html
output.pdf: 0.11.0.pdf
---

Annoucing Crowbook 0.11.0!
================================

I'm pleased to announce the
[0.11.0](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook/releases/tag/v0.11.0) 
release of [Crowbook](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook), a
converter from Markdown books to PDF, EPUB and HTML. 
[...]
```

So, yeah, it's Markdown, plus some options to set title, author, and
the ouput files that must be generated (here, PDF and HTML). With
this, you can then run 

```
$ crowbook -s 0.11.0.md
```

and it will generate
an [HTML](http://lise-henry.github.io/articles/0.11.0.html) and
a [PDF](http://lise-henry.github.io/articles/0.11.0.pdf) file. The
`-s` argument is 
short for `--single`, and it simply tells `crowbook` that it is
processing a Markdown file embedding some additional options. The
other way of calling Crowbook is without with argument and with a full
book configuration file, listing all Markdown chapters that are part
of the book:

```yaml
author: Jane Doe
title: A great novel
lang: en
cover: some_cover.png

output.html: great_novel.html
output.pdf: great_novel.pdf
output.epub: great_novel.epub

- intro.md
+ chapter_01.md
+ chapter_02.md
```

So, that's basically a list of key/value pairs in a YAML syntax (you
can run `crowbook --list-options` to get the full list of valid
options), followed by the lisf of chapter names, prefixed by `-` (if
they are not numbered), `+` (if they are numbered) or `!` (if the
title should be hidden).

I won't go too much into the details here, you can look at
the [Github page](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook) and the
[user guide](http://lise-henry.github.io/crowbook/book/book.html) for
more information. There is also
an [online demo here](http://vps.crowdagger.fr/crowbook/) if you want
to quickly test how it looks without insalling anything.

Current features
-------------------

The current features of Crowbook are the following:

* It should be able to generate valid HTML, EPUB and LaTeX files, and can transform
  the later to PDF if you have a working installation of LaTeX. There
  was the beginning of a work on rendering to ODT but it is nowhere yet.
* It tries to make your document "typographically correct": in english
  (or other languages)
  this mostly means this so-called "smart quote" feature, in french
  it also involves quite a lot of work on non-breaking spaces (there
  is currently no other supported languages for this feature, though
  I'm open to it if there are some needs).
* There's this weird feature where it can generate proofread copies,
  connecting to a local [LanguageTool](https://languagetool.org/)
  server for grammar checking, and it can also detect repetition
  (using another library I
  developed, [Caribon](https://github.com/lise-henry/caribon)).
* It's localized in english (the default) and french.

Why did I start Crowbook?
-------------------------------

Well, first, honestly, because I could and it was fun. But there were
some other reasons, too. The thing is, I'm french, and I'm a somewhat
semi-professional (whatever that means) fantasy writer, and I found
the support of correct french typography in other tools (except LaTeX,
but it's no good at exporting to EPUB) quite lacking.

> (Really, french typography is quite a pain. In english, you just
> stick e.g. a question mark to the last word, don't you? In french,
> we add a space. But it should be a non-breaking space, so the `?`
> doesn't end at the beginning of the newline. Except it shouldn't
> just be (though these days it is more and more used because
> really few tools do it right) the "standard" `U+0020` non-breaking
> space, but a narrow one, so the questionmark doesn't end too far
> away from the actual question.)

Of course, I could only have written some kind of "pre-processor" and
continued using e.g. [pandoc](http://pandoc.org/) (which was what I
used before), but well, Rust was
so cool to program in that I felt I should rather somewhat reinvent
the wheel. 

> (I did, somewhat later, move these "formatting" functions
> to a separate crate,
> [crowbook-text-processing](https://crates.io/crates/crowbook-text-processing),
> which while being name-prefixed by "crowbook-" can be used elsewhere
> if you need some automatic french typographic formatter (or smart
> quotes, actually)).

Comparison, and why didn't I rather contribute to mdBook?
---------------------------------------------------------------------

So, compared to other similar
tools, I think [Crowbook](https://github.com/lise-henry/crowbook) is more
focused on:

* novels and fiction than technical books (code blocks or tables should
  work but they will certainly not look as nice as with other
  converters, and there is no support for e.g. mathematics or inline HTML); 
* correct typographical settings (without requiring any work from the
  writer), than not ever breaking some quote that should have stayed
  straight because it can no longer be copy/pasted on your terminal
  (though it's possible to disable it);
* EPUB and PDF than HTML (HTML should still be valid and hopefully not
  too ugly, but comparatively there is probably less relative work on
  it than other tools);
* french (the github pages, code, and even currently the docs are
  still (only) in english, but it tries to respect french typography
  when `lang` is set to french, and it is localized in french).
  
I won't really talk about why I didn't contribute to other tools
instead, and rather link to [this wonderful picture posted on the Rust
Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/5l2uc6/me_irl/), but
will focus on "Why not contribute
to [mdBook](https://github.com/azerupi/mdBook/) instead?", since it is
also written in Rust and is a quite similar tool.

There are some not-really-good reasons, and I don't want to evacuate
them:

* creating a new project is fun, contributing to an existing project
  is hard;
* having to work with other people can be time-consuming but also a
  bit frightening: when I push a commit to my own Github project, I
  don't have to worry about people rejecting it and saying it's
  horrible (I'm not saying this kind of reaction happens often in the
  Rust community, but I mean, I think it requires a bit more self-confidence).
  
But I also think the two projects really have different focus, and
trying to merge too different approaches might lead to more friction than
do any good (e.g., as a writer, I enjoy the proofreading features, but
they might seem ludicrous to insert into a converter). Maybe trying to
make features usable as independent 
libraries can be a better way to ensure a bit of code reuse? I already
separated the formatting part to
[crowbook-text-processing](https://crates.io/crates/crowbook-text-processing);
I'm thinking about doing the same for the EPUB building part (though
doing it cleanly might require a bit more work and thinking).


What I learned
-----------------

When I started developing Crowbook, it was more as a toy project than
a serious thing, and I didn't expect to invest that much time in
it. But then I started using it for my books, which gave me more
motivation to add features or fix bugs. So I guess dogfooding is good
(though I don't like the term, I'm more of a cat person). 

When I chose the Rust language for this project, it was only because I
liked this language and wanted to get a bit deeper into it; not 
because I felt it was the more appropriate. Clearly, there is nothing
low-level or that is "systems programming" stuff or even that requires
that much safety or performances (anyway in most of my usage the call
to LaTeX will take an order of magnitude longer to complete). I still
found it really enjoyable, and I really think that Rust is relevant to
even non-really-that-low-level projects. 

There are various aspects of Rust that I thought I would never get
into, but still did: e.g. I started being like "I can clone anything I
really don't care about performances", yet I still wrote an article
about
[Optimizing string performances](http://lise-henry.github.io/articles/optimising_strings.html) (I
guess the attention to performances is quite contagious in the Rust
community). I also got deeper into macros than I thought I would
because I wrote
[a somewhat hacky internationalization library](http://lise-henry.github.io/articles/localization.html). 

I really enjoyed the type system of Rust and the impression it gave me
that the compiler would do a lot of work to make sure that my code was
correct. I don't think I have ever been that confident writing code:
it's still astonishing to me when I make some substantial
modifications to my code, and the compiler point me to some problems,
but when it does compile, it works correctly on the first try. I was
not used to that. Obviously, now I know that there are other more
high-level languages that can have similar guarantees (e.g. OCaml),
but while there *was* some friction induced by the low-levelness of
Rust (namely the borrow checker), once I had learned it it was on a
whole rather minimal. 

I also found the Rust community quite nice, and I think that it's also
because of its atmosphere that I ended up digging into things that I didn't know
that well to begin with.

This isn't to say that everything is perfect in the Rust world: most
notably, I think the ecosystem is still immature on certain
aspects. E.g., if I ended up writing 
another internationalization libary, it's because there isn't a
current standard on how to do it; actually, looking at the reverse
dependencies of internationalization libraries on crates.io, I think
Crowbook might very well be the first Rust program that is localized
in another language than english. There are libraries that work just
fine but are terribly undocumented (though there are also wonderful
documentations, such as [clap](https://crates.io/crates/clap)
and [regex](https://crates.io/crates/regex)). And, of course, there
are libraries that I would love to exist in Rust but still are not
here (yet?) (e.g. I'd love a grammar checking library in Rust instead of Java
or Python, or a Rust equivalent to PyPdf). Still, on a whole, it's
pretty nice, and Cargo and Rustup are wonderful tools.

To sum it up, I'm quite pleased that I was able to develop a program that at least fits
my needs (if it fits other people's ones too that would obviously be
great). It's probably not great code but thanks to Rust I'm quite
confident that all hell won't break loose if I try to add a new
feature or fix a bug. If I had to choose a word to describe Rust
(which is a current thread), I'd definitely would feel "empowering".

